% Is Time Real?
% Alex Sayers

As ever, the answer to the question, "is time real?" depends largely on the
precice analysis we give to the notion of time; and, as ever, the debate over
quite what features are necessary in such an analysis has proven devicive.
Historically, there are two approaches which have been taken: the first is
phenomenological in nature, and takes time to be a series of events
characterised by their being in the distant past, the present, the near future,
etc.; the second is physical in nature, and takes time to be a series of events
ordered by a two-place relation, "occurs later than".

I call the latter of these physical, because it is essentially the view of time
adopted by physics: of a dimension much like space, in which temporal distance
can be calculated between any two events. In the past, it has been known as the
B-series; today, in light of the relativity of simultineity, we might instead
think of the complete space-time picture of the entire history of the universe.
As an intrinsic part of a (putatively reality-describing) physical theory,
there is little difficulty involved in claiming that this space-time picture
is, in a sense, real. (That is to say, that all objects, past and future,
really do exist, and that events along their world-lines stand in definite
spacio-temporal relations to each other.)

The form that the phenomenological view of time---that it constitutes a
so-called A-series---is less perspicuous. The terms of the A-series are in
various places taken to be events, properties of events, and relations of
events to the present. In any case, suffice it to say that the view the
A-series is descriptive of the real nature of time amounts to the
characterisation of all events as past, present, or future. It is, again,
unclear whether this characterisation extends to the provision of a metric, or
even an ordering.

It should be noted that these views of time are not inconsistent; so long as
events which are past are earlier than those which are future, then no conflict
need arise. However, many take one description to be the more fundamental; for
instance, those who assert that the concept of change is inextricably linked to
the concept of time claim that the A-series is the ontologically prior, since
the B-series is static, all its relations permanent. On the other hand, many
have rejected the intelligibility of the A-series, and have thus taken the
B-series to be the proper description. McTaggart takes both views seriously,
and famously concludes from them that time is unreal.

Let us examine the various claims regarding the relationship between time and
change. The important ones for our purposes are 1) that if the B-series is real
and the A-series unreal, then nothing ever changes, and that 2) any adequate
account of time does account for change.

The first of these brings into question the intended sense of the word
'change'. If I claim that "the field strength reduces as you move away from the
particle", I am making a claim about a quantity which changes with respect to
some spatial coordinate. The notion that the language used ("as you move
away...") implies some temporal involvement is mistaken; rather, we are
implicitly keeping the time fixed. In the same way, we can make claims about
the way things change with time given only a B-series. We can talk about how
fast some quantity changes, or how one thing becomes another. Clearly, then,
there is a sense in which the B-series does feature change.

But is this the kind of change we mean when we say, as part of a
McTaggart-style argument, "an adequate account of time does account for
change"? Let me now say that it is not. Nevertheless, this understanding of
change has been taken seriously; it has even been claimed that the passage of
time simply is change of this sort.[^1] The physical view of time, however,
would seem to allow for the existence of time without events to occupy it (at
least, in analogy with the acceptability of empty space). It has been claimed
that even if it is possible that there should be periods of time in which no
change occurs, we could never have reason to think that such a "global freeze"
has occurred.

Shoemaker provides a thought experiment which is supposed to give us precicely
this. I will refrain from describing it here, but I would note that while it
does seem to make the global freeze hypothesis more elegant than its rival, it
is not obvious how informative it is in its capacity as a thought experiment. I
say this because while it is an empirical law that all activity ceases for an
hour every 30 years, we are left without a mechanism to explain how the
unfreeze comes about. In particular, it seems that Shoemaker's possible world
demans the occurance of certain uncaused events---namely, unfreeze events. This
implies that the freezes are a fundamental feature of the world, rather than a
result of its physical laws; in other words, the freezes are a result of the
way time behaves, rather than of the way the bodies within the world behave.
This seems to undermine Shoemaker's argument somewhat, since what he has
provided is a universe the occupants of which have reason to believe that time
operates differently to time as we know it.

I said earlier that this is not the kind of change which McTaggart and others
think is a fundamental feature of time, to be explained by any account thereof,
and left unexplained by the B-theory. The change referred to above is simply
the statement that there is variation in the state of affairs between different
points in space-time. The theory that the B-series is a complete description of
time is concerning because while variation exists within the space-time
picture, the picture itself does not change. The objects and events contained
within it never change in any of their properties or relations. If this picture
is a complete description of the fundamental ontology, then there is no fact of
the matter as to what time it is _now_.

McTaggart claims that it is true that the events are unchanging in their
properties and relations, for to alter these would be to alter the event.
Rather, something must be added to the B-series which is not itself an event,
but to which all events may hold a temporal reltation; this "something" is
meant to indicate the present. The characteristics conferred on events by the
A-series may change without altering the events substantively. Whence we come
to the second part of McTaggart's proof: these characteristics are, of course,
mutually exclusive---no event can be past, present, and future; and yet all
events _are_ past, present, and future. Hence, says McTaggart, the A-series is
internally inconsistent.

McTaggart is at some points espousing the importance of change---when, in
particular, he claims that events must change in a way not provided for by the
statically defined space-time picture--and at other point espousing precicely
the opposite---for instance, when he claims that events are past, present, and
future in a way which is illegal (which is to say that he is rejecting the
salvation offered by a tensed semantics). His point, I suppose, is that it is
the internal inconsistency of the notion of time which forces us to variously
apply these two conflicting principles. But is it impossible that we should
uniformly apply only one?

What happens if we allow that the nature of reality is such that it can be well
described by a universal space-time picture? Can we account for claims about
events being past or future? And if we can, do we run into problems when these
events take on inconsistent properties? The answer to the first is that we can,
by noting that such claims are clearly indexical: their truth is governed by
the temporal relation between the event being referenced and the event of the
claim's utterance. Treating such claims as time-indexed allows us to easily
account for cases involving complex tenses: the claim that "when Caesar was
around, television was yet to be invented" is analysed as "it was true in the
time of Caesar that 'the invention of television is a future event'", and the
truth of the claim is apparent simply by virtue of the temporal relations
between the events in question. The answer to the second worry is that the
statements "$e$ was future", "$e$ is present" and "$e$ will be past" are not
inconsistent, because they are made true by $e$ standing in different relations
to the events of their utterance. It's not the case that $e$ possesses three
mutually incompatible properties, but simply that statements about $e$ are made
at three different times.

McTaggart's grounds for rejecting a theory of time in which the B-series is
fundamental, and the characteristics conferred by the A-series derivative, now
seem rather shaky. Aside from stipulating that time involves change, and that
the change cannot be of the form offered by the B-series, there is no real
argument for the primacy of the A-series. This, in turn, undermines the
arguments for the unreality of time, and the unreality of tense.


[^1]: I'm thinking, here, of Julian Barbour
